# Prosper Loan Dataset Exploration

## Dataset
> The data in this file contains information for 113,937 loans with 81 variables (columns) on each loan (row), including, but not limited to: loan origination date, listing category (numeric), term, borrower rate, monthly loan payment, prosper score, loan status, estimated loss, employment status, stated monthly income, debt to income ratio, delinquencies in the last 7 years, and borrower state. These are the 13 variables that I chose to focus on in my exploration.

## Summary of Findings
> Through my exploration, I found that the numeric scoring system Prosper uses to evaluate how low- or high-risk they label a consumer whether they will default or complete their loan is faulty, at best. I initially wanted to explore multiple variables to see if one (or a few) can accurately guess what loan status that consumer will have at the end of their loan. Overall, it seems that the Prosper Score is only accurate when compared to the Employment Status of the consumer, everything else was either inaccurate, or slightly off-track.

> I found a few, small, relationships that were surprising. First, I found that consumers with monthly payments < 1,000 dollars per month tend to default more than consumers that have payments > 1,000 dollars per month. Second, more loans were completed no matter what prosper score was given. The second visual under multivariate does show a correlation between stated monthly income and loan status (ie: no matter the prosper score): if a consumer stated lower monthly income on their application, they have a higher risk of defaulting on the loan.

## Key Insights for Presentation
> For this presentation, I decided to focus on a few variables to see if they determine whether or not a consumer will default on their loan. A few variables I focused on were: Listing Category, Stated Monthly Income, Loan Status, Prosper Score, Monthly Loan Payment, and Employment Status. I did explore a few visuals for Debt to Income Ratio, but because the data had quite a few outliers, and it was more spread out than the other variables, I decided not to pursue any comparisons with DTI.

> I started my univariate exploration with viewing which loan category consumers chose the most, what the average (stated) monthly income is, what the distribution of loan statuses are (and then condensing them into two categories: completed and defaulted), and then doing a quick exploration into the median debt to income ratio.

> During the bivariate and multivariate exploration, I chose to dive deeper across multiple variables compared to the loan status variable. First, I chose to explore the prosper score versus loan status to see if Prosper's scoring system is accurate. Next, I wanted to explore box plots of both the monthly loan payment and listing category to see if there was any correlation between these variables and loan status (quick note: I chose not to move forward with listing category as the data was too similar to loan status and showed no real correlation, whether positive or negative). Then I chose to compare employment status versus both stated monthly income and loan status.

> Moving on to the multivariate exploration proved to be the hardest for me to make sure my plots were clean and tidy. I used mostly box plots and cat plots to combine all the variables I explored above to dive deeper in to the data to see if anything does accurately contribute to the prosper score. Other than those with a prosper score of 9.0, most consumers (regardless of score) were able to complete their loan and avoid going in to default status. The prosper score 11.0 is an outlier, but it is good to see that this is the only score with no defaults; and this is good because 10.0 is the highest (least risk of default) score that the data gives us. Between box plot 1 and box plot 2 (in the multivariate section), more loans were completed no matter what prosper score was given, it does show a correlation between stated monthly income and loan status (ie: no matter the score), if a consumer stated lower monthly income on their application, they have a higher risk of defaulting on the loan. There is also a bigger gap between median stated monthly income from score 1.0 - 7.0: we see from score 8.0 - 10.0 the median income gap starts to get smaller, almost the same for score 9.0.
